I've been thinking of doing a side project for a while but just haven't found
the time with work, family, and personal stuff going on.

I wanted to do a chat app because I didn't have any experience with websockets
so I thought this would be a great way to get to know them.

Additionally I wanted to explore htmx, and this bun thing that everyone seems
to be talking about. I also decided to toss in a new server library to try out
since I've only used Express.

This presentation will be mostly about htmx because I didn't find bun nor elysiajs too
interesting and am really excited about what htmx brings to the table.

But first let's talk about websockets briefly.
Generally the FE sends a request to the BE and the BE sends a response. This 
doesn't really give the BE a way to push a message to the FE. There is long polling
where the FE holds a connection to the BE until BE responds, and then starts another
long polling session.

Enter the Websocket protocol. It keeps the connection open to the BE and allows 
both parties to send a message. The FE sends a GET request to the BE with 
an upgrade header, at which point the BE upgrades it and the connection is open.

There are libraries that implement the websocket protocol and make this very smooth,
so smooth that it seems trivial.  I found it easy to use and didn't feel
like I understood the full power.
So I decided to implement the websocket protocol 
in a future project to truly understand it.

Moving onto htmx.

When you think of htmx you have to think of it in comparison with
the typical frontend framework of today such as React. With React
you have a stateless server that connects to the database to fulfill
the request from the frontend. The database is the state of the app.
React creates a representation of a slice of the state of the 
database in the frontend. So, now you have a duplication of the 
state. Sort of, the state of the database could change without
the frontend knowing.

The state in the FE allows or disallows actions, but the information
to allow the action is still there, just hidden from the user.
The idea of React is fairly straightforward. You represent the app
in the React state. An action such as a get request will update
the state which will in turn update the view. So, you have to 
essentially update the state in the database which will in turn
send information which will be used to update the state in the 
FE.

The duplication of state in the frontend isn't just an issue because
of duplication. It is also an issue because it turns out that
handling state is complicated and requires tooling such as redux.
It isn't as simple as holding a global object that represents state,
it needs actions and reducers.

Wouldn't it be simpler to simply use the state in the database and
just send html to the frontend?

That is sort of what htmx (everyone says something different so not sure what it stands for)
offers. It is a simple and small FE
framework that allows you to display html in the frontend. It is 
similar to React in that you can update parts of the FE instead of
the whole page. It listens to js events to make ajax calls to 
get a html fragment and inserts the response html fragment 
into the dom.

With htmx the state of your app is stored in the database and represented
in the frontend with html. An update such as a get request will 
update the appropriate part of the page. No need to keep 3 representations
of the state of your app and manage them.

This also alleviates the need for separate teams to work on an application.
Now everyone is fullstack. You don't need to wait for a FE dev
to update the frontend because you haven't bothered to learn Redux.
You can do it yourself, all of it. It's all there in one place.

htmx isn't just for simple webapps, it can be used for complicated 
apps that require a reactive FE.

Here a french company replaced their 2 year React UI of their Saas
product with htmx in a couple of months. Resulting in lowering their
load time in the frontend and the whole team becoming fullstack, 
although they had to let go of the FE dev.

timestamp: 5:00. 14:20
Technical result 18:00 22:00

Here are some examples of websites that are written in htmx.
https://www.nikevision.com/
https://zorro.management/

Here are some examples of UI using htmx
https://htmx.org/examples/
